![](media/image1.png)

**Date and Time:** Tuesday, 10 September 2024 10:05:00AM SGT

**Job Number:** 233093771

**Document (1)**

> 1\. [[* LETANG v. COOPER. \[1961 L. No. 296\] \[1965\] 1 Q.B. 232,
> \[1965\] 1 Q.B.
> 232*]{.underline}](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWN0-TXD5-X1N4-00000-00&idtype=PID&context=1522471)
>
> **Client/Matter:** -None-
>
> **Search Terms:** Letang v Cooper \[1965\] QB 232
>
> **Search Type:** Natural Language
>
> **Narrowed by:**

  ------------------ -----------------
  **Content Type**   **Narrowed by**
  UK Cases           -None-
  ------------------ -----------------

Letang v Cooper

[*[Overview]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4FXV-YY50-TWW4-219V-00000-00&context=1522471)
\| **\[1965\] 1 QB 232**, \| [*[\[1964\] 2 All ER
929]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4CSP-94H0-TWP1-611T-00000-00&context=1522471),
\| [*[\[1964\] 3 WLR
573]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:5FJH-TCT1-F00Y-N509-00000-00&context=1522471),
\| \[1964\] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep 339, \| 108 Sol Jo 519

 [***[LETANG v. COOPER. \[1961 L. No. 296\] \[1965\] 1 Q.B. 232]{.underline}***](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWN0-TXD5-X1N4-00000-00&context=1522471)
===========================================================================================================================================================================================================

\[COURT OF APPEAL\]

Lord Denning M.R., Danckwerts and Diplock L.JJ.

1964 June 12, 15.

**Limitation of Action --- Trespass to the person --- Personal injuries
--- Facts also giving rise to cause of action in negligence --- Action
in negligence statute-barred Whether trespass to the person \"breach of
duty\" --- Whether period of limitation six years or three ---
Limitation Act, 1939 (2 & 3 Geo. 6, c. 21), s. 2 (1) --- Law Reform
(Limitation of Actions, etc.) Act, 1954 (2 & 3 Eliz. 2, c. 36), s. 2
(1).**

**Trespass --- Involuntary --- Unintentional act --- Trespass to the
person --- Sunbather run over by motor car --- Whether cause of action
in trespass or negligence --- Whether actual damage necessary ingredient
--- Whether \"breach of duty\" on part of driver --- Limitation of
action.**

**Statute --- Construction --- Mischief aimed at --- Whether legitimate
to look at report of committee preceding legislation (post, p. 240E).**

On July 10, 1957, the plaintiff, whilst sunbathing on a piece of grass
which was used as a car park, was injured when the defendant drove his
car over her legs. On February 2, 1961, she issued a writ claiming
damages for loss and injury caused to her by the defendant\'s negligence
in driving his car and/or the commission by him of a trespass to the
person of the plaintiff. In her statement of claim she relied on the
pleaded negligence and the particulars thereof as founding her claim in
trespass. Elwes J. held that the plaintiff\'s action in trespass was not
an action for damages for \"breach of duty\" subject to a limitation
period of three years under section 2 of the Limitation Act, 1939, as
amended by section 2 (1) of the Law Reform (Limitation of Actions, etc.)
Act, 1954,1 and he awarded the plaintiff damages for the defendant\'s
trespass. The defendant appealed:-

+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| > *Held*, (1) allowing the appeal, that the plaintiff\'s cause of    |
| > action was an action for negligence and as such was statute-barred |
| > under                                                              |
| >                                                                    |
| > **\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_**                                       |
| >                                                                    |
| > **^ ^**1 Law Reform (Limitation of Actions, etc.) Act, 1954, s. 2: |
| > \"(1) At the end of section 2 (1) of the Limitation Act, 1939      |
| > (which subsection provides, amongst other things, that there shall |
| > be a limitation period of six years for actions founded on simple  |
| > contract or on tort) the following proviso shall be inserted -     |
| > \'Provided that, in the case of actions for damages for            |
| > negligence, nuisance orbreach of duty (whether the duty exists by  |
| > virtue of a contract or of provision made by or under a statute or |
| > independently of any contract or any such provision) where the     |
| > damages claimed by the plaintiff for the negligence, nuisance or   |
| > breach of duty consist of or include damages in respect of         |
| > personal injuries to any person, this subsection shall have effect |
| > as if for the reference to six years there were substituted a      |
| > reference to three years.\'\"                                      |
| >                                                                    |
| > *** \[\*233\] ***                                                  |
| >                                                                    |
| > section 2 (1) of the Law Reform (Limitation of Actions, etc.) Act, |
| > 1954.                                                              |
| >                                                                    |
| > *Per* Lord Denning M.R. and Danckwerts L.J. When the injury to a   |
| > plaintiff is caused by the defendant\'s intended act, the cause of |
| > action is trespass to the person; when the act is not intended, a  |
| > plaintiff\'s only cause of action is negligence (post, p.          |
| > **[239E]{.smallcaps}**).                                           |
| >                                                                    |
| > *Per* Diplock L.J. A cause of action is simply a factual situation |
| > the existence of which entitles one person to obtain from the      |
| > court a remedy against another person. If A., by failing to        |
| > exercise reasonable care, inflicts direct personal injuries upon   |
| > B., it is permissible today to describe this factual situation     |
| > indifferently, either as a cause of action for negligence or an    |
| > action for trespass to the person, though \"negligence\" is the    |
| > expression to be preferred (post, pp. **[242-243]{.smallcaps}**).  |
| > As the plaintiff\'s factual situation could be described as an     |
| > action for negligence, her action was statute-barred under section |
| > 2 (1) of the Law Reform (Limitation of Actions, etc.) Act, 1954.   |
| >                                                                    |
| > *Quaere* whether actual damage is a necessary ingredient in        |
| > unintentional trespass to the person (post, pp.                    |
| > **[244G-245C]{.smallcaps}**).                                      |
| >                                                                    |
| > \(2\) That the words of section 2 (1) of the Law Reform            |
| > (Limitation of Actions, etc.) Act, 1954, were plain and wide       |
| > enough to include all tortious breaches of duty including trespass |
| > to the person and, therefore, if the plaintiff had a cause of      |
| > action in trespass, her action was statute-barred under that       |
| > section.                                                           |
| >                                                                    |
| > *Billings v. Reed* [*[\[1945\] K.B.                                |
| > 11]{.u                                                             |
| nderline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases- |
| uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K3D-RRG0-TXD5-X0CP-00000-00&context=1522471); |
| > 61 T.L.R. 27, C.A. followed.                                       |
| >                                                                    |
| > *Kruber v. Grzesiak* \[1963\] 2 V.R. 621 applied.                  |
| >                                                                    |
| > Decision of Elwes J. [*[\[1964\] 2 Q.B.                            |
| > 53]{.u                                                             |
| nderline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases- |
| uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWP0-TXD5-X0YK-00000-00&context=1522471); |
| > \[1964\] 2 W.L.R. 642; \[1964\] 1 All E.R. 669 reversed.           |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

APPEAL from Elwes J.2

On July 10, 1957, the plaintiff, Doreen Ann Letang, was sunbathing on
the grass in part of the grounds of the Ponosmere Hotel, Perranporth,
Cornwall, used as a car park, when the defendant, Frank Anthony Cooper,
drove his Jaguar motor car over both her legs. On February 2, 1961, the
plaintiff issued a writ claiming damages \"for loss and injury to the
plaintiff caused by (1) the negligence of the defendant in driving a
motor car and/or (2) the commission by the defendant of a trespass to
the person of the plaintiff. Paragraph 1 of her statement of claim
alleged that the defendant \"negligently and violently drove a Jaguar
motor car ... against and over the body and legs of the plaintiff
thereby injuring the plaintiff and causing her loss and damage.\" The
paragraph then set out the particulars of the negligence, injuries and
special damage. Paragraph 2 of the statement of claim alleged \"Further
or in the

**^ ^**2 [*[\[1964\] 2 Q.B.
53]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWP0-TXD5-X0YK-00000-00&context=1522471);
\[1964\] 2 W.L.R. 642; \[1964\] 1 All E.R. 669.

*** \[\*234\] ***

alternative, the plaintiff repeats paragraph 1 hereof and says that in
driving the said motor car against the plaintiff\'s body and legs
negligently and violently as aforesaid the defendant committed a
trespass to the person of the plaintiff.\" There followed a statement
that the particulars under that paragraph were the same as in paragraph
1.

On February 11, 1964, Elwes J. found negligence against the defendant
and assessed her damages at £500 general and £75 special damages.
Argument then took place on the question whether the plaintiff\'s claim
was statute-barred by section 2 (1) of the Law Reform (Limitation of
Actions, etc.) Act, 1954. In a reserved judgment Elwes J. held that the
words \"negligence, nuisance or breach of duty\" in section 2 (1) of the
Law Reform (Limitation of Actions, etc.) Act, 1954, did not include an
action for trespass to the person and that, as the plaintiff\'s action
had been started within six years of the trespass, her action in
trespass was not statute-barred under section 2 of the Limitation Act,
1939. He awarded the plaintiff a total of £575 damages.

The defendant appealed.

The decision of Diplock J. in *Fowler v. Lanning*3 was relied on by the
plaintiff as authority that an action in trespass still

**^ ^**3 [*[\[1959\] 1 Q.B.
426]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWP0-TXD5-X0V1-00000-00&context=1522471);
\[1959\] 2 W.L.R. 241; \[1959\] 1 All E.R. 290.

*** \[\*235\] ***

exists, and also by the defendant as authority that if the injury is
unintentional the plaintiff has the burden of proving negligence. Adams
J. in *Kruber v. Grzesiak*,4 an Australian case in the Supreme Court of
Victoria, had to construe section 5 (6) of the Limitation of Actions
Act, 1958, where the words are the same as in section 1 (2) of the Law
Reform (Limitation of Actions, etc.) Act, 1954, and he held that the
subsection included actions for trespass to the person. The words
\"negligence, nuisance or breach of duty\" are also to be found in
section 3 (1) (b) of the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act,
1939, and it was held in *Billings v. Reed*5 that those words included
trespass. The argument of Mr. Bernard Caulfield in *Pontin v. Wood*,6
although referred to by Holroyd Pearce L.J.,7 formed no part of the
decision in that case and does not assist the plaintiff here; nor can
she obtain assistance from the judgment of Brett J. in *Gibbs v.
Guild*.8

Parliament has modified or varied some of the suggestions of the Tucker
Committee and the Act cannot be construed by reference to the Report
(see *Assam Railways and Trading Co. Ltd. v. Commissioners of Inland
Revenue)*,9 yet authors of the textbooks have referred to the Report as
authority for the proposition that the period of limitation in trespass
is still six years. There are two ways of approaching the problem,
first, that an action for damages for injury which was not intended is
an action for negligence: *Fowler v. Lanning*10 and *National Coal Board
v. J. E. Evans & Co. (Cardiff) Ltd. and Maberley Parker Ltd*.,11 Adams
J. in *Kruber v. Grzesiak*12 approached the problem in this way.
Secondly, that the words \"breach of duty (whether the duty exists by
virtue of a contract or of a provision made by or under a statute or
independently of any contract or any such provision)\" are very wide
indeed and must include the tort of trespass; a person is under a duty
not to commit a trespass to the person of his neighbour; see Beven on
Negligence, 4th ed. (1928), Vol. 1, p. 8.

**Martin Jukes Q.C.** and **Stanley Ibbotson** for the plaintiff. There
is historically a clear distinction between an action for

**^ ^**4 \[1963\] 2 V.R. 621.

**^ ^**5 [*[\[1945\] K.B.
11]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K3D-RRG0-TXD5-X0CP-00000-00&context=1522471).

**^ ^**6 [*[\[1962\] 1 Q.B.
594]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWN0-TXD5-X0H4-00000-00&context=1522471),
604; \[1962\] 2 W.L.R. 258; \[1962\] 1 All E.R. 294, C.A.

**^ ^**7 [*[\[1962\] 1 Q.B.
594]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWN0-TXD5-X0H4-00000-00&context=1522471),
612.

**^ ^**8 ***(1882) 9 Q.B.D. 59***, 67.

**^ ^**9 ***\[1935\] A.C. 445***; 50 T.L.R. 540, H.L.(E.).

**^ ^**10 [*[\[1959\] 1 Q.B.
426]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWP0-TXD5-X0V1-00000-00&context=1522471).

**^ ^**11 [*[\[1951\] 2 K.B.
861]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWS0-TXD5-X140-00000-00&context=1522471);
\[1951\] 2 T.L.R. 415; \[1951\] 2 All E.R. 310, C.A.

**^ ^**12 \[1963\] 2 V.R. 621.

*** \[\*236\] ***

trespass to the person and an action on the case - which is respectively
whether the violence was direct or indirect: *Scott v. Shepherd*13 and
*Leame v. Bray*.14 After *Williams v. Holland*15 that distinction was
not so important as both direct or indirect violence could form the
basis of an action on the case, but it was an additional remedy and did
not destroy the right to bring an action in trespass. In 1873 the forms
of action were abolished but the causes of action remained unchanged and
an action for trespass still exists: *Fowler v. Lanning*.16 In an action
for negligence, unlike an action for trespass, damage has to be proved:
see *Williams v. Milotin*.17 There is that clear distinction between the
two causes of actions and once a plaintiff has elected one of those
causes, the period of limitation may well be different.

A statute, such as a Limitation Act, which takes away the rights of a
subject must be construed liberally in favour of the citizen. Lord
Greene M.R. stated in *Billings v. Reed*18 that. the ordinary canons of
construction could not be used to construe a war time statute; see also
*Roddam v. Morley*19 and *O\'Connor v. Isaacs*.20 The statute under
construction does not purport to say that all actions for damages for
personal injuries must be brought within three years, if that had been
intended it could have been stated simply and succinctly. The matter has
not been stated simply and, therefore, it must have been intended only
to bar certain actions after three years.

> \"Negligence\" and \"nuisance\" have a specific meaning to a lawyer,
> but \"breach of duty\" has no simple definition and is not merely a
> duty to obey the law, which was the definition of Adams J. in *Kruber
> v. Grzesiak*.21 If breach of duty includes all torts there would have
> been no need specifically to refer to the torts of nuisance and
> negligence in the section. There is no such thing as a duty not to
> assault or libel a person; the law merely provides the victim with a
> remedy. Trespass is a tortious remedy and unlike criminal law there
> are no prohibitions with penalties attached. Torts do not arise from a
> breach of duty; they arise from the fact that if a person acts wrongly
> he must pay for that act. The draftsman of the section seemed to have
> thought that breach of duty should be explained, which

**^ ^**13 (1773) 2 Wm.Bl. 892.

**^ ^**14 (1803) 3 East 593.

**^ ^**15 (1833) 10 Bing. 112.

**^ ^**16 [*[\[1959\] 1 Q.B.
426]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWP0-TXD5-X0V1-00000-00&context=1522471).

**^ ^**17 (1957) 97 C.L.R. 465.

**^ ^**18 [*[\[1945\] K.B.
11]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K3D-RRG0-TXD5-X0CP-00000-00&context=1522471),
15.

**^ ^**19 (1857) 1 De G. & J. 1.

**^ ^**20 [*[\[1956\] 2 Q.B.
288]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWS0-TXD5-X0TS-00000-00&context=1522471);
\[1956\] 3 W.L.R. 172; \[1956\] 2 All E.R. 417, C.A.

**^ ^**21 \[1963\] 2 V.R. 621, 623.

*** \[\*237\] ***

> would not have been necessary if breach of duty has such a wide
> meaning.

*Ibbotson* following. The Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act,
1939, was passed in wartime; the normal canons of construction were not,
therefore, applied so as to prevent a subject being deprived of his
normal rights, *per* Lord Greene M.R. in *Billings v. Reed*.22 In such
times the safety of the realm is the supreme law, *per* Lush J. in
*Normans v. Matthews*.23

**Croom-Johnson Q.C.** replied.

*Cur. adv. vult.*

Solicitors: *Barlow, Lyde & Gilbert; Brown, Turner, Compton Carr & Co.
for R. Lucas & Sons, Harrow*.

**D. P. Croom-Johnson Q.C.** and **Dennis Barker** for the defendant.
The plaintiff\'s action was based on the defendant\'s negligence; this
is shown by the pleadings; the plaintiff accepted that she had that
burden of proof and Elwes J. held that she had discharged it and proved
negligence. If section 2 (1) of the Law Reform (Limitation of Actions,
etc.) Act, 1954, does not include trespass and the plaintiff\'s action
in trespass is not barred after three years, strange anomalies will be
imported into English law for, by section3 of the Act, an attempt was
made to provide that the period of limitation would be the same for
actions brought under the Fatal Accidents Acts as for personal injury
actions. As actions under the Fatal Accidents Acts must include actions
for trespass, the result would be that a widow suing in trespass would
have three years in which to bring her action, whilst those merely
injured by the defendant\'s default would have six years. The purpose of
the Tucker Committee\'s Report on the Limitation of Actions, Cmd. 7740
(1949), and the Act of 1954, was to shorten the period in which an
action for damages for personal injuries could be commenced.

June 15.LORD DENNING M.R. read the following judgment: On July 10, 1957,
the plaintiff was on holiday in Cornwall. She was staying at a hotel and
thought she would sunbathe on a piece of grass where cars were parked.
While she was lying there the defendant came into the car park driving
his Jaguar motor car. He did not see her. The car went over her legs and
she was injured.

On February 2, 1961, more than three years after the accident, the
plaintiff brought this action against the defendant for damages for loss
and injury caused by (1) the negligence of the defendant in driving a
motor car and (2) the commission by the defendant of a trespass to the
person.

The sole question is whether the action is statute-barred. The plaintiff
admits that the action for negligence is barred after three years, but
she claims that the action for trespass to the person is not barred
until six years have elapsed. The judge has so held and awarded her £575
damages for trespass to the person.

Under the Limitation Act, 1939, the period of limitation was six years
in all actions founded \"on tort\"; but, in 1954, Parliament reduced it
to three years in actions for damages for personal injuries, provided
that the actions come within these words of section 2 (1) of the Law
Reform (Limitation of Actions, etc.) Act, 1954: \"actions for damages
for negligence, nuisance or breach of duty (whether the duty exists by
virtue of a contract or of provision made by or under a statute or
independently of any contract or any such provision) where the damages
claimed by the plaintiff for the negligence, nuisance or breach of duty
consist of or include damages in respect of personal injuries to any
person.\"

**^ ^**22 [*[\[1945\] K.B.
11]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K3D-RRG0-TXD5-X0CP-00000-00&context=1522471),
15.

**^ ^**23 (1916) 32 T.L.R. 303, 304, D.C.

*** \[\*238\] ***

The plaintiff says that these words do not cover an action for trespass
to the person and that therefore the time bar is not the new period of
three years, but the old period of six years.

The argument, as it was developed before us, became a direct invitation
to this court to go back to the old forms of action and to decide this
case by reference to them. The statute bars an action on the case, it is
said, after three years, whereas trespass to the person is not barred
for six years. The argument was supported by reference to text-writers,
such as Salmond on Torts, 13th ed. (1961), p. 790. I must say that if we
are, at this distance of time, to revive the distinction between
trespass and case, we should get into the most utter confusion. The old
common lawyers tied themselves in knots over it, and we should do the
same. Let me tell you some of their contortions. Under the old law,
whenever one man injured another by the direct and immediate application
of force, the plaintiff could sue the defendant in trespass to the
person, without alleging negligence (see *Leame v. Bray*1, whereas if
the injury was only consequential, he had to sue in case. You will
remember the illustration given by Fortescue J. in *Reynolds v.
Clarke*2: \"If a man throws a log into the highway, and in that act it
hits me, I may maintain trespass because it is an immediate wrong; but
if as it lies there I tumble over it, and receive an injury, I must
bring an action upon the case; because it is only prejudicial in
consequence.\" Nowadays, if aman carelessly throws a piece of wood from
a house into a roadway, then whether it hits the plaintiff or he tumbles
over it the next moment, the action would not be trespass or case, but
simply negligence. Another distinction the old lawyers drew was this: if
the driver of a horse and gig negligently ran down a passer-by, the
plaintiff could sue the driver either in trespass or in case (see
*Williams v. Holland*3, but if the driver was a servant, the plaintiff
could not sue the master in trespass but only in case: see *Sharrod v.
London and North Western Railway Co*.4 In either case today the action
would not be trespass or case, but only negligence.

If we were to bring back these subtleties into the law of limitation, we
should produce the most absurd anomalies; and all the more so when you
bear in mind that under the Fatal Accidents Act the period of limitation
is three years from the death. The decision of Elwes J. if correct would
produce these

**^ ^**1 (1803) 3 East 593.

**^ ^**2 (1795) 1 Str. 634, 635.

**^ ^**3 (1833) 10 Bing. 112.

**^ ^**4 (1849) 4 Exch. 580.

*** \[\*239\] ***

results: it would mean that if a motorist ran down two people, killing
one and injuring another, the widow would have to bring her action
within three years, but the injured person would have six years. It
would mean also that if a lorry driver was in collision at a cross-roads
with an owner-driver, an injured passenger would have to bring his
action against the employer of the lorry driver within three years, but
he would have six years in which to sue the owner-driver. Not least of
all the absurdities is a case like the present. It would mean that the
plaintiff could get out of the three-year limitation by suing in
trespass instead of in negligence.

I must decline, therefore, to go back to the old forms of action in
order to construe this statute. I know that in the last century Maitland
said \"the forms of action we have buried, but they still rule us from
their graves\" (see Maitland, Forms of Action (1909), p. 296), but we
have in this century shaken off their trammels. These forms of action
have served their day. They did at one time form a guide to substantive
rights; but they do so no longer. Lord Atkin, in *United Australia Ltd.
v. Barclays Bank Ltd*.,5 told us what to do about them: \"When these
ghosts of the past stand in the path of justice clanking their mediaeval
chains the proper course for the judge is to pass through them
undeterred.\"

The truth is that the distinction between trespass and case is obsolete.
We have a different sub-division altogether. Instead of dividing actions
for personal injuries into trespass (direct damage) or case
(consequential damage), we divide the causes of action now according as
the defendant did the injury intentionally or unintentionally. If one
man intentionally applies force directly to another, the plaintiff has a
cause of action in assault and battery, or, if you so please to describe
it, in trespass to the person. \"The least touching of another in anger
is a battery,\" *per* Holt C.J. in *Cole v. Turner*.6 If he does not
inflict injury intentionally, but only unintentionally, the plaintiff
has no cause of action today in trespass. His only cause of action is in
negligence, and then only on proof of want of reasonable care. If the
plaintiff cannot prove want of reasonable care, he may have no cause of
action at all. Thus, it is not enough nowadays for the plaintiff to
plead that \"the defendant shot the plaintiff.\" He must also allege
that he did it intentionally or negligently. If

**^ ^**5 [*[\[1941\] A.C.
1]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4W-PD30-TXD8-6142-00000-00&context=1522471),
29; 57 T.L.R. 13; \[1940\] 4 All E.R. 20, H.L.(E.).

**^ ^**6 (1704) 6 Mod. 149.

*** \[\*240\] ***

intentional, it is the tort of assault and battery. If negligent and
causing damage, it is the tort of negligence.

The modern law on this subject was well expounded by Diplock J. in
*Fowler v. Lanning*,7 with which I fully agree. But I would go this one
step further: when the injury is not inflicted intentionally, but
negligently, I would say that the only cause of action is negligence and
not trespass. If it were trespass, it would be actionable without proof
of damage; and that is not the law today.

In my judgment, therefore, the only cause of action in the present case,
where the injury was unintentional, is negligence and is barred by
reason of the express provision of the statute.

In case I am wrong about this and the plaintiff has a cause of action
for trespass to the person, I must deal with a further argument which
was based on the opinion of text-writers, who in turn based themselves
on the Tucker Committee\'s report on the limitation of actions which
preceded the legislation. This was a committee over which Lord Tucker
presided. They reported in 1949. They recommended that, in actions for
damages for personal injuries, the period of limitation should be
reduced to two years; but they said: \"We wish, however, to make it
clear that we do not include in that category actions for trespass to
the person, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution or defamation of
character, but we do include such actions as claims for negligence
against doctors.\" I think the text-writers have been in error in being
influenced by the recommendations of the committee. It is legitimate to
look at the report of such a committee, so as to see what was the
mischief at which the Act was directed. You can get the facts and
surrounding circumstances from the report so as to see the background
against which the legislation was enacted. This is always a great help
in interpreting it. But you cannot look at what the committee
recommended, or at least, if you do look at it, you should not be unduly
influenced by it. It does not help you much, for the simple reason that
Parliament may, and often does, decide to do something different to cure
the mischief. You must interpret the words of Parliament as they stand.
without too much regard to the recommendations of the committee: see
*Assam Railways and Trading Co. Ltd. v. Commissioners of Inland
Revenue*.8 In this very case, Parliament did not reduce the period to
two years. It made it three years.

**^ ^**7 [*[\[1959\] 1 Q.B.
426]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWP0-TXD5-X0V1-00000-00&context=1522471);
\[1959\] 2 W.L.R. 241; \[1959\] 1 All E.R. 290.

**^ ^**8 ***\[1935\] A.C. 445***; 50 T.L.R. 540, H.L.(E.).

*** \[\*241\] ***

It did not make any exception of \"trespass to the person\" or the rest.
It used words of general import; and it is those words which we have to
construe, without reference to the recommendations of the Committee.

So we come back to construe the words of the statute with reference to
the law of this century and not of past centuries. So construed, they
are perfectly intelligible. The tort of negligence is firmly
established. So is the tort of nuisance. These are given by the
legislature as sign-posts. Then these are followed by words of the most
comprehensive description: \"Actions for ... breach of duty (whether the
duty exists by virtue of a contract or of a provision made by or under a
statute or independently of any contract or any such provision).\" Those
words seem to me to cover not only a breach of a contractual duty, or a
statutory duty, but also a breach of any duty under the law of tort. Our
whole law oftort today proceeds on the footing that there is a duty owed
by every man not to injure his neighbour in a way forbidden by law.
Negligence is a breach of such a duty. So is nuisance. So is trespass to
the person. So is false imprisonment, malicious prosecution or
defamation of character. Professor Winfield indeed defined \"tortious
liability\" by saying that it \"arises from the breach of a duty
primarily fixed by the law: this duty is towards persons generally and
its breach is redressible by an action for unliquidated damages\": See
Winfield on Tort, 7th ed. (1963), p. 5.

In my judgment, therefore, the words \"breach of duty\" are wide enough
to comprehend the cause of action for trespass to the person as well as
negligence. In support of this view, I would refer to the decision of
this court in *Billings v. Reed*,9 where Lord Greene M.R.10 gave the
phrase \"breach of duty\" a similar wide construction. I would also
refer to the valuable judgment in Australia of Adam J. in *Kruber v.
Grzesiak*.11 The Victorian Act is in the self-same words as ours; and I
would, with gratitude, adopt his interpretation of it.

I come, therefore, to the clear conclusion that the plaintiff\'s cause
of action here is barred by the Statute of Limitations. Her only cause
of action here, in my judgment, where the damage was unintentional, was
negligence and not trespass to the person. It is therefore barred by the
word \"negligence\" in the statute. But even if it was trespass to the
person, it was an action for

**^ ^**9 [*[\[1945\] K.B.
11]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K3D-RRG0-TXD5-X0CP-00000-00&context=1522471).
61 T.L.R. 27, C.A.

**^ ^**10 [*[\[1945\] K.B.
11]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K3D-RRG0-TXD5-X0CP-00000-00&context=1522471),
19.

**^ ^**11 \[1963\] 2 V.R. 621.

*** \[\*242\] ***

\"breach of duty\" and is barred on that ground also. Accordingly, I
would allow the appeal.

DANCKWERTS L.J. read the following judgment: I agree, and I need only
add a few words. The question seems to me to be completely covered by
the provisions of the Act of 1954, which add a proviso to section 2 (1)
of the Limitation Act, 1939. I must read the words of the statute again:
\"Provided that, in the case of actions for damages for negligence,
nuisance or breach of duty (whether the duty exists by virtue of a
contract or of provision made by or under a statute or independently of
any contract or any such provision) where the damages claimed by the
plaintiff for the negligence, nuisance or breach of duty consist of or
include damages in respect of personal injuries to any person, this
subsection shall have effect as if for the reference to six years there
were substituted a reference to three years.\"

The terms of this provision are very wide, and, in my opinion, cover the
case of a claim for damages for trespass to the person of the plaintiff.
It may be true that the statute is limiting rights which a person might
possess at common law, but this argument cannot prevail if the meaning
of the words of the statute is plain; and, in my view, the words of the
statute are plain in their meaning.

I find support for this conclusion in the statement of Lord Greene M.R.
in *Billings v. Reed*,12 notwithstanding that the similar words there
under consideration were in a wartime statute, and no very effective
contention seems to have been put forward for a different construction.

In my view, trespass to the person involves a breach of duty, as in the
case of any other tort, as Mr. Beven said many years ago in his book on
negligence, Negligence in Law, 4th ed. (1928), Vol. 1, p. 8. It would be
monstrous if the ghosts of the forms of action, abolished over 90 years
ago, compelled us to come to a different conclusion.

I agree also with the other grounds for allowing the appeal discussed by
Lord Denning M.R. in the earlier part of his judgment. I, therefore,
also would allow the appeal.

DIPLOCK L.J. read the following judgment: A cause of action is simply a
factual situation the existence of which entitles one

**^ ^**12 [*[\[1945\] K.B.
11]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K3D-RRG0-TXD5-X0CP-00000-00&context=1522471),
19.

*** \[\*243\] ***

person to obtain from the court a remedy against another person.
Historically, the means by which the remedy was obtained varied with the
nature of the factual situation and causes of action were divided into
categories according to the \"form of action\" by which the remedy was
obtained in the particular kind of factual situation which constituted
the cause of action. But that is legal history, not current law. If A.,
by failing to exercise reasonable care, inflicts direct personal injury
upon B., those facts constitute a cause of action on the part of B.
against A. for damages in respect of such personal injuries. The remedy
for this cause of action could, before 1873, have been obtained by
alternative forms of action, namely, originally either trespass vi et
armis or trespass on the case, later either trespass to the person or
negligence: (see Bullen & Leake, Precedents of Pleading, 3rd ed.
(1868)). Certain procedural consequences, the importance of which
diminished considerably after the Common Law Procedure Act, 1852, flowed
from the plaintiff\'s pleader\'s choice of the form of action used. The
Judicature Act, 1873, abolished forms of action. It did not affect
causes of action; so it was convenient for lawyers and legislators to
continue to use, to describethe various categories of factual situations
which entitled one person to obtain from the court a remedy against
another, the names of the various \"forms of action\" by which formerly
the remedy appropriate to the particular category of factual situation
was obtained. But it is essential to realise that when, since 1873, the
name of a form of action is used to identify a cause of action, it is
used as a convenient and succinct description of a particular category
of factual situation which entitles one person to obtain from the court
a remedy against another person. To forget this will indeed encourage
the old forms of action to rule us from their graves.

If A., by failing to exercise reasonable care, inflicts direct personal
injuries upon B., it is permissible today to describe this factual
situation indifferently, either as a cause of action in negligence or as
a cause of action in trespass, and the action brought to obtain a remedy
for this factual situation as an action for negligence or an action for
trespass to the person - though I agree with Lord Denning M.R. that
today \"negligence\" is the expression to be preferred. But no
procedural consequences flow from the choice of description by the
pleader: see *Fowler v. Lanning*.13 They are simply alternative ways of
describing the same factual situation.

**^ ^**13 [*[\[1959\] 1 Q.B.
426]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4F-RWP0-TXD5-X0V1-00000-00&context=1522471).

*** \[\*244\] ***

In the judgment under appeal, Elwes J. has held that the Law Reform
(Limitation of Actions, etc.) Act, 1954, has by section 2 (1) created an
important difference in the remedy to which B. is entitled in the
factual situation postulated according to whether he chooses todescribe
it as negligence or as trespass to the person. If he selects the former
description, the limitation period is three years; if he selects the
latter, the limitation period is six years. The terms of the subsection
have already been cited, and I need not repeat them.

The factual situation upon which the plaintiff\'s action was founded is
set out in the statement of claim. It was that the defendant, by failing
to exercise reasonable care, of which failure particulars were given,
drove his motor car over the plaintiff\'s legs and so inflicted upon her
direct personal injuries in respect of which the plaintiff claimed
damages. That factual situation was the plaintiff\'s cause of action. It
was the cause of action for which the plaintiff claimed damages
inrespect of the personal injuries which she sustained. That cause of
action or factual situation falls within the description of the tort of
negligence and an action founded on it, that is, brought to obtain the
remedy to which the existence of that factual situation entitles the
plaintiff, falls within the description of an action for negligence. The
description \"negligence\" was in fact used by the plaintiff\'s pleader;
but this cannot be decisive for we are concerned not with the
description applied by thepleader to the factual situation and the
action founded on it, but with the description applied to it by
Parliament in the enactment to be construed. It is true that that
factual situation also falls within the description of the tort of
trespass to the person. But that, as I have endeavoured to show, does
not mean that there are two causes of action. It merely means that there
are two apt descriptions of the same cause of action. It does not cease
to be the tort of negligence because it can also be called by another
name. An action founded upon it is nonetheless an action for negligence
because it can also be called an action for trespass to the person.

It is not, I think, necessary to consider whether there is today any
respect in which a cause of action for unintentional as distinct from
intentional trespass to the person is not equally aptly described as a
cause of action for negligence. The difference stressed by Elwes J. that
actual damage caused by failure to exercise reasonable care forms an
essential element in the cause of action for negligence, but does not in
the cause of action in trespass to the person, is, I think, more
apparent than real when

*** \[\*245\] ***

the trespass is unintentional; for, since the duty of care, whether in
negligence or in unintentional trespass to the person, is to take
reasonable care to avoid causing actual damage to one\'s neighbour,
there is no breach of the duty unless actual damage is caused. Actual
damage is thus a necessary ingredient in unintentional as distinct from
intentional trespass to the person. But whether this be so or not, the
subsection which falls to be construed is concerned only with actions in
which actual damage in the form of personal injuries has in fact been
sustained by the plaintiff. Where this factor is present, every factual
situation which falls within the description \"trespass to the person\"
is, where the trespass is unintentional, equally aptly described as
negligence. I am therefore of opinion that the facts pleaded in the
present action make it an action \"for negligence ... where the damages
claimed by the plaintiff for the negligence ... consist of or include
damages in respect of personal injuries to\" the plaintiff, within the
meaning of the subsection, and that the limitation period was three
years.

In this respect I agree with the judgment of Adam J., the only direct
authority on this point, in the Victorian case of *Kruber v.
Grzesiak*.14 To his lucid reasoning I am much indebted. This is yet
another illustration of the assistance to be obtained from the citation
of relevant decisions of courts in other parts of the Commonwealth, and
I am particularly grateful to counsel for the defendant and those
instructing him for drawing our attention to this case. But I agree with
my brethren and with Adam J. that this action also falls within the
words \"actions for ... breach of duty (whether the duty exists by
virtue of a contract or of a provision made by or under a statute or
independently of any contract or any such provision).\" I say \"also
falls,\" for in the absence of the word \"other\" before \"breach of
duty\" that expression as explained by the words in parenthesis is
itself wide enough to include \"negligence\" and \"nuisance.\"

In their ordinary meaning, the words \"breach of duty\" as so explained
are wide enough to cover any cause of action which gives rise to a claim
for damages for personal injuries, as Lord Greene M.R. in *Billings v.
Reed*15 said of very similar words in the Personal Injury (Emergency
Provisions) Act, 1939. Why should one give them a narrower and strained
construction? The Act is a limitation Act; it relates only to procedure.
It does not divest any person of rights recognised by law; it limits the
period within

**^ ^**14 \[1963\] 2 V.R. 621.

**^ ^**15 [*[\[1945\] K.B.
11]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K3D-RRG0-TXD5-X0CP-00000-00&context=1522471).

*** \[\*246\] ***

which a person can obtain a remedy from the courts for infringement of
them. The mischief against which all limitation Acts are directed is
delay in commencing legal proceedings; for delay may lead to injustice,
particularly where the ascertainment of the relevant facts depends upon
oral testimony. This mischief, the only mischief against which the
section is directed, is the same in all actions in which damages are
claimed in respect of personal injuries. It is independent of any
category into which the cause of action which gives rise to such a claim
falls. I see no reason for approaching the construction of an enactment
of this character with any other presumption than that Parliament used
the words it selected in their ordinary meaning and meant what it chose
to say.

Counsel for the plaintiff has, however, submitted that an action for
trespass to the person is not an action for \"breach of duty\" at all.
It is, he contends, an action for the infringement by the defendant of a
general right of the plaintiff; there is no concomitant duty upon the
defendant to avoid infringing the plaintiff\'s general right. This
argument or something like it, for I do not find it easy to formulate,
found favour with Elwes J. He drew a distinction between what he
described as a \"particular duty\" owed by a particular defendant to a
particular plaintiff which he said, no doubt with *Hay or Bourhill v.
Young*16 in mind, was an essential element in the cause of action in
negligence, and a \"general duty\" not to inflict injury on anyone; but
to describe the latter, which is merely the obverse of the plaintiff\'s
cause of action in trespass to the person, as a \"duty\" was, he
thought, not to use the language of precision as known to the law.

I would observe in passing that a duty not to inflict direct injury to
the person of anyone is by its very nature owed only to those who are
within range - a narrower circle of Atkinsonian neighbours than in the
tort of negligence. But in any event this distinction between a duty
which is \"particular\" because it is owed to a particular plaintiff and
a duty which is \"general\" because the duty owed to the plaintiff is
similar to that owed to everyone else is fallacious in relation to civil
actions. A. has a cause of action against B. for any infringement by B.
of a right of A. which is recognised by law. Ubi jus, ibi remedium. B.
has a corresponding duty owed to A. not to infringe any right of A.
which is recognised by law. A. has no cause of action against B. for an

**^ ^**16 [*[\[1943\] A.C.
92]{.underline}*](https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=cases-uk&id=urn:contentItem:4K4W-PD30-TXD8-6148-00000-00&context=1522471);
\[1942\] 2 All E.R. 396, H.L.(Sc.).

*** \[\*247\] ***

infringement by B. of a right of C. which is recognised by law. B. has
no duty owed to A. not to infringe a right of C., although he has a duty
owed to C. not to do so. The number of other people to whom B. owes a
similar duty cannot affect the nature of the duty which he owes to A.
which is simply a duty not to infringe any of A.\'s rights. In the
context of civil actions a duty is merely the obverse of a right
recognised by law. The fact that in the earlier cases the emphasis
tended to be upon the right and in more modern cases the emphasis tends
to be upon the duty merely reflects changing fashions in approach to
juristic as to other social problems, and must not be allowed to
disguise the fact that right and duty are but two sides of a single
medal.

An alternative way of narrowing the construction of these wide general
words which I think was also present to the mind of the judge was to
apply the principle of noscitur a sociis and, because the cause of
action in both negligence and nuisance involves the infliction of actual
damage as an essential element. to construe \"breach of duty\" as
limited to breaches of duty giving rise to causes of action in which the
infliction of actual damage is an essential element. The maxim noscitur
a sociis is always a treacherous one unless you know the societas to
which the socii belong. But it is clear that breach of duty cannot be
restricted to those giving rise to causes of action in which the
infliction of actual damage is an essential element, for the words in
parenthesis expressly extend to a duty which exists by virtue of any
contract and the infliction of actual damage is not an essential element
in an action for breach of contractual duty.

Really, the only argument for cutting down the plain and wide meaning of
the words breach of duty is that to do so renders the inclusion of the
specific torts of negligence and nuisance unnecessary. But economy of
language is not invariably the badge of parliamentary draftsmanship.
Negligence and nuisance are the commonest causes of action which give
rise to claims for damages in respect of personal injuries. To mention
them specifically without adding the word \"other\" before \"breach of
duty\" is not in itself sufficient to give rise to any inference that
the wide general words were not intended to cover all causes of action
which give rise to claims for damages in respect of personal injuries;
particularly when the same combination of expressions in a similar
context had already been given a very wide interpretation by the Court
of Appeal. On these grounds I would

*** \[\*248\] ***

hold that the limitation period for this action was three years and
would allow the appeal.

Appeal allowed with costs.

Leave to appeal to the House of Lords refused.

\[Reported by HILARY JELLIE, Barrister-at-Law.\]

> **End of Document**
